---
layout: post
title: "Bukidnon"
author: Nick Aguilos
tag: featured
excerpt: Quezon is a landlocked town in the heart of Central Mindanao. Here lies many limestone outcrops that collectively will be considered as the Climbing Capital of the Philippines. Mackie Makinano, the main person behind the development of many of the Philippines' climbing areas, has been traveling back and forth to Quezon; every trip, he and his team of crag developers bolts several more sport lines up the faces of these limestone giants
---

I get to Quezon, Bukidnon several days after the 1st Kiokong Rock Climbing Festival commenced. This event would be considered a milestone to many as it marks this area's opening to the public

<!-- Excerpt -->
Quezon is a landlocked town in the heart of Central Mindanao. Here lies many limestone outcrops that collectively will be considered as the Climbing Capital of the Philippines. Mackie Makinano, the main person behind the development of many of the Philippines' climbing areas, has been traveling back and forth to Quezon; every trip, he and his team of crag developers bolts several more sport lines up the faces of these limestone giants
<!-- End Excerpt-->

This project is a massive undertaking, requiring the need for big support from outdoor brands, the government, and individuals. 400 sport climbing lines are expected to be put up once this project  concludes. Let's call it the magical 400. Personally, given the sheer number of limestone cliffs found here, there could me more than 400.

After dropping my bags off at the inn, I take a 15-minute 'habal' ride to the trail head that leads to the crags. It was already 3pm as I started the short trek. Neverland Crag would be my first stop.

I bump into Mackie along the trail, he was on his way back to prepare for dinner. Always the one to look out for everyone, he asks how my trip was and if I've already eaten. He mentions that a fixed line has already been setup for those wanting to shoot from a higher angle. 

Neverland involves a bit of trekking through thick bushes on rocky terrain. The area itself is mostly shaded due to the large growth of foliage around. It is currently the most frequented crag here due to it's large number of routes ranging from low 6s to an 8a. Only 3/4 of the cliff face has been bolted up. It is expected to have harder climbs in the 8a+ range once the remaining 1/4 has been opened

I notice several familiar faces already up on the wall working routes and projects. A few have retired to lying on the sandy belay area, cheering climbers on

A majority of the climbers were cheering Aldwin Ibanez as he clips the final few draws of Peter Pan--currently the hardest climb in Neverland, rated at 8a. As the name suggests, all of the routes in Neverland are named after characters in Peter Pan. The major characters are reserved for the hard climbs. Captain Hook has not been put up yet, and I am excited to see what kind of line that is

I hopped on Masthead, the line made famous by Grid Magazine for being the cover of their last issue (Dru Robles, Jeric Rustia, and Mackie Makinano). It is a line up a face that leads onto an arete that looks like the bow of a ship. 

The following day leads me to Skeletor Crag. Skeletor is further away and takes around 30 minutes to trek to. Named after the pile of bones partially buried along the base of the crag, Skeletor was one of the first few crags Mackie and the Quezon Bolting Team developed when they started this project a year ago.

I would describe Skeletor as a gym--a wall to one side, and a flat belay area to the other. The type of climbing here ranges from face climbing, to slab, to three dimensional pulls on stalactites. It is amazing how much variety there is in just one piece of rock

The bolting team has certainly made good strides in putting up lines up Skeletor since the last time I visited a few months prior. Extensions to the initial routes made them a few levels harder. Columbia, located to the extreme left of the wall, is currently the hardest line graded at 7a+

The next several days were just about moving back and forth between Neverland, Blue Water, and Skeletor crags, trying to document as much of the event as possible. It were only these 3 crags that was utilized for the event given how shaded they were during the day.

Three more crags exist though, Meow Pao with its crazy long multipitch climbs, Chili Wall, located near Skeletor, and Mordor, which rivals Neverland in terms of hard sport climbs. To clarify, these arent the only walls in Quezon. There are dozens more, but these are the ones that have been bolted upon.

The Filipino climbing community is blessed to be so tight knit, that we are basically one big family of climbers. Rock trips are gatherings. A means by which we catch up with old friends, welcome new ones, and bring this family even closer. It is a multiday event wherein we celebrate our love for the vertical plane. These gatherings wont be possible without those who work tirelessly to develop areas and push our ideas of what is possible outdoors.

On our last day, I trek with Mackie to the base of Meow Pao. He was going to thank everyone who has shown support to this bolting project, and I was going to film it. Looking through the viewfinder and listening to him speak, I feel and see his passion to push outdoor climbing in our country. It is amazing at what Mackie has accomplished in this realm, and Quezon, Bukidnon is his cherry on top. 

